---
layout: post
title: AZP (Dev notes)
date:   2019-07-02 13:50:39
categories: regionalization AZP clusterpy
author: Xun Li
---

# AZP (Automatic Zoning Procedure)

Original [ClusterPy](https://github.com/clusterpy/clusterpy) pacakge (2014) only works on python2.x.

It is under revising and will become a submodule in PySAL.

I am working on a C++ version of AZP and Max-p, which will be a regionalization feature in GeoDa. 

1. AZP
2. AZP-Simulated Annealing
3. AZP-Tabu
3. AZP-Reactive Tabu


## AZP

AZP is a mildly steepest descent algorithm that aggregates N zones (areas) into M regions. "The M output regions should be formed of internally connected, contiguous, zones." ([Openshaw_Rao1995]_ pp 428).

> A steepest descent algorithm would be an algorithm which follows the above update rule, where at each iteration, the direction ∆x(k) is the steepest direction we can take. That is, the algorithm continues its search in the direction which will minimize the value of function, given the current point.


### Objective function

SS (sum-of-squares cost function) of selected variables: within-cluster sum of squares from each observation sto the attribute centroid of its cluster


### Distance function

Used to compute SS: Euclidean (default)


### Algorithm

1. Construction
1.1. Exclude neighborless observations
1.2. Initial *p* starting observations using K-Means
1.3. Construct potential regions by "growing" from each starting observation, compute initial SS
1.4. Get the intra-bordering observations (those could be shared by more than two regions)
2. Local Search
  2.1 (step3) Select a random region
  2.2 (step4) Get bordering observations of the selected region
  2.3 (step5) Swap any bordering observation to neighbor region if SS improves
  2.4 Repeat step3-4-5 until no improvement


### Implementation

Input/Output

#### Input

1. data: n x m, n is the number of observation, m is the dimension of variable space which is used to determine the clusters

2. k: the number of "zones" or clusters

3. w: the contiguity weights or the connectivity structure defines who's who's neighbor

4. controls: variable and a limitation value that a cluster or zone has to be restricted on (e.g. population (sum) should be at least 10K but less than 50k)


##### ZoneControl

A ZoneControl is for one variable (e.g. population), and it contains the values of the variable. One can setup more than one ZoneControl for AZP.

A ZoneControl can have more than one control, which defines the
Operation (Sum/mean/max/min), Comparator (less/more) and a restrict
value. For example: the following two AddControl() function calls
define two restrictions when building a zone
```c++
// pop is std::vector<double> with population values for all observations.
ZoneControl zc(pop);
zc.AddControl(Operation::SUM, Comparator::MORE_THAN, 10000);
zc.AddControl(Operation::SUM, Comparator::LESS_THAN, 50000);
```

When constructing a zone, it will check if the zone satisfies the following controls:
* 1. SUM of population is MORE than value 10,000
* 2. SUM of population is LESS than value 50,000

```c++
// zc_list is a std::vector<ZoneControl> array
// obs_list is a std::vector<int> array indicates which observations
// compose this zone
Zone zone(zc_list, obs_list);
bool is_valid = zone.CheckControl();
```

or 
```C++
bool is_zone_valid = zc.CheckZone(zone);
```

#### 1. AZP

##### Initial using K-Means

The logic starts by finding *p* starting areas using K-Means. Then, processing the neighbors of the *p* areas. Try to add neighbor to a nearby region, and adding neighor's neighbors to process later. Repeat the previous step, until all areas have been processed.

##### Local Boundary Optimiser

a. Select and remove a random region K from *p* regions
b. Identify a list of areas that are on border of region K
c. Randomly select bordering area, and swap it to neighbor region if making improvement; Repeat until the list is exhausted
d. Repeat a-c until no improvement


#### 1. AZP-Simulated Annealing


c. Randomly select bordering area, and swap it to neighbor region if making improvement; Otherwise, make a move with a probability *R(0,1) = f(temperature, cooling_rate)* Repeat until the list is exhausted

Step 5 Randomly sample this list until there is a local improvement in the objective function or an equivalently good move. Then make the move. Otherwise make the move with a probability given Boltzmann's equation

NOTE: the clusterpy did it incorreclty: for each possible move, if